Updated documentation for Progress Indicators (#2271)
iTwin/iTwinUI: apps/website/src/content/docs/progressindicator.mdx

---
title: Progress indicator
description: Progress indicators express the length of in-progress operations.
thumbnail: ProgressIndicator
---

<p>{frontmatter.description}</p>

## Usage

> There are two types of progress indicators which are linear and radial. Linear indicators show progress on a linear bar, while radial indicators display progress in a circular form.

Reviewer: We should use the exact component names here, and maybe use a list for readability.

```suggestion
There are two types of progress indicators available as separate components:

- `ProgressLinear`: shows progress on a linear bar
- `ProgressRadial`: shows progress in a circular form.
```

Reviewer: This comment is actually applicable throughout the page. Most of the references to "linear indicator" and "radial indicator" could be replaced with the component names.

Author: I have explicitly mentioned these components.

> The default progress indicator is indeterminate. If a [value](#value) is passed, the indicator becomes determinate.

Reviewer: This paragraph could probably be removed/rephrased to fit into the "Value" section.

Author: Hmmm, probably I should just split it and move the second sentence where value is mentioned to the "Value" section?

Reviewer: How about we keep it in the section but move it *below* the demo and expand on it to clarify what "indeterminate" is. This segues nicely into the next section.

> By default, the progress indicators are considered to be "indeterminate". This is useful for short processes, where it isn't necessary (or possible) to indicate the completion percentage. For longer processes, a "determinate" progress indicator should be used.

Author: I have made the change.

> <LiveExample src='ProgressLinear.main.jsx' truncate={false}>

Reviewer: Could some of these examples be combined? The demos are taking up too much space.

I'm thinking `ProgressLinear.main` and `ProgressRadial.main` could be combined. Similarly, `ProgressLinear.value` and `ProgressRadial.value` could be combined.

Author: I have combined the examples. There are two problems I encountered:
- The linear indicator has to be specified its width so that it could show up with the radial one.
- When I passed width and value, the linear indicator does not have the correct filled value.

I'm not sure what to do to correct the styling when having these together.

Reviewer: Hmm, I think if you use `flex-direction: column` on the container, then it should work better? We shouldn't need to pass an explicit `width` to the progress indicators.

Author: `flex-direction: column` seems to have the same problem :(

Reviewer: So there are two problems here:
1. `align-items: center` tries to collapse the items. To fix this, we can add `.demo-container > * { width: 100% }` in the CSS, instead of the inline style.
2. There is actually a bug in `ProgressLinear`: it does not correctly merge the `style` prop. We should fix this in a separate PR.
   https://github.com/iTwin/iTwinUI/blob/76613b5ffbe04a7ad899cd7c39a4dbc9dd0b99b1/packages/itwinui-react/src/core/ProgressIndicators/ProgressLinear.tsx#L85-L90

Author: I have added this as an after-PR todo. Can I use `:first-child` instead of grabbing all direct children? It caused a pretty odd visual error
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/467fd998-b429-4b53-9707-632dc9c4b2fd)

Reviewer: `:first-child` is not reliable because the order of elements might change. Can you try removing `align-items: center` and centering using `.demo-container > * { margin-inline: auto }`?

Author: Hmm, I still have the same problem as above.

Reviewer: Sorry I should have clarified: the `width: 100%` also needs to be removed. It was only necessary when `align-items: center` was used.

But it looks like `margin-inline: auto` reintroduces the problem where the linear indicator collapses entirely.

For the sake of simplicity, I would say let's just *not* center it. So this would be the _entire_ CSS:

```css
.demo-container {
  display: flex;
  flex-direction: column;
  width: 200px;
  gap: var(--iui-size-s);
}
```

Author: I have made the change.

  <AllExamples.ProgressLinearMainExample client:load />
</LiveExample>

<LiveExample src='ProgressRadial.main.jsx' truncate={false}>
  <AllExamples.ProgressRadialMainExample client:load />
</LiveExample>

### Value

> To specify a value for indeterminate indicator, pass a number into the `value` prop. This prop is available for both linear and radial indicators. If the `indeterminate` prop is set to `true`, this value will be ignored. This value must be inclusively between 0 and 100.

Reviewer: Is "indeterminate" a typo?

Also some slight rewording/moving things around for readability and clarification around the purpose of `value`

```suggestion
To specify a value for determinate progress indicator, the `value` prop can be used. This prop is available for both linear and radial indicators. The value must be inclusively between `0` and `100`, representing what percentage of the task has completed.

If the `indeterminate` prop is set to `true`, this value will be ignored.
```

Author: I have made the change.

Reviewer: Similar to https://github.com/iTwin/iTwinUI/pull/2271#discussion_r1784868852, this note about `indeterminate` could be prefixed with "Note:" and moved below the demo? Since there are multiple demos in this section, we can put the note below everything, at the bottom of this section.

Author: I have put this below the demo.

> To specify a value for indeterminate indicator, pass a number into the `value` prop. This prop is available for both linear and radial indicators. If the `indeterminate` prop is set to `true`, this value will be ignored. We recommend keeping the value inclusively between 0 and 100.

Author: I have rephrased this.

<LiveExample src='ProgressLinear.value.jsx' truncate={false}>
  <AllExamples.ProgressLinearValueExample client:load />
</LiveExample>

<LiveExample src='ProgressRadial.value.jsx' truncate={false}>
  <AllExamples.ProgressRadialValueExample client:load />
</LiveExample>

Exclusively for linear indicators, the `isAnimated` flag is helpful when applying animation to the indicator as the value changes.

<LiveExample src='ProgressLinear.isAnimated.jsx'>
  <AllExamples.ProgressLinearAnimatedExample client:load />
</LiveExample>

### Status

> Three available statuses for both linear and radial progress indicators are:

Reviewer: We should clarify the purpose of these statuses. It's not something that makes sense by default. I imagine that the desired UX flow is to show a default progress indicator, and then set a status after it completes or fails.

Author: I have added more wording to this. Does it sound okay?

Reviewer: Slight rewording and cleanup:

> The `status` prop can be used to convey the outcome of a process. The recommended UX flow is to display the default progress indicator during the loading process, and then update the `status` to reflect whether the process was successful, encountered an error, or requires attention.
>
> Three available statuses are:

Author: I have made the change.

- `"positive"`
- `"negative"`
- `"warning"`

<LiveExample src='ProgressLinear.status.jsx'>
  <AllExamples.ProgressLinearStatusExample client:load />
</LiveExample>

> Each radial indicator with status is accompanied by an icon, providing a visual cue to inform the current progress state better. The icon can be replaced by a [content](#content).

Reviewer: Is this paragraph redundant? Feels a bit out of place in the "Status" section.

Author: I have made the change.

<LiveExample src='ProgressRadial.status.jsx'>
  <AllExamples.ProgressRadialStatusExample client:load />
</LiveExample>

### Label

Indicator labels can be passed into the `labels` prop as an array. If one label is passed, it will be centered. If there are two labels, each is pushed to one end of the progress indicator. This prop is only available for linear indicators.

<LiveExample src='ProgressLinear.label.jsx'>
  <AllExamples.ProgressLinearLabelExample client:load />
</LiveExample>

### Size

> Four size options available are:

Reviewer: The `size` prop needs to be explicitly mentioned.

- `"x-small"`
- `"small"`
- `"medium"` (default)
- `"large"`

This prop is only available for radial indicators.

<LiveExample src='ProgressRadial.size.jsx'>
  <AllExamples.ProgressRadialSizeExample client:load />
</LiveExample>

### Content

> The radial progress indicator can be wrapped around JSX elements, such as icons or texts. This content helps provide flexibility to enhance the progress display with additional visual appearance. This prop is only available for radial indicators.

Author: I have mentioned this in the `Content` description.

> The radial progress indicator can be wrapped around JSX elements, such as icons or texts. This content helps provide flexibility to enhance the progress display with additional visual appearance. Moreover, indicators of `"x-small"` size will not display its content. This prop is only available for radial indicators.

Reviewer: The "moreover" sentence could be moved below the demo and turned into a "Note:", so that it doesn't distract from the main point here.

Author: I have moved it to a "Note".

Reviewer: I actually meant it should be _below the demo_ (at the end of the section). In my mind, the demo should come first because it's not really affected by the note.

Author: I have moved this below the demo.

---
title: Progress indicator
description: Progress indicators express the length of in-progress operations.
thumbnail: ProgressIndicator
---

<p>{frontmatter.description}</p>

## Usage

There are two types of progress indicators available as separate components:

- `ProgressLinear`: shows progress on a linear bar

> - `ProgressRadial`: shows progress in a circular form.

Author: I have made the change.

<LiveExample src='ProgressIndicators.main.jsx' truncate={false}>
  <AllExamples.ProgressIndicatorsMainExample client:load />
</LiveExample>

By default, the progress indicators are considered to be "indeterminate". This is useful for short processes, where it isn't necessary (or possible) to indicate the completion percentage. For longer processes, a "determinate" progress indicator should be used.

### Value

> To specify a value for determinate progress indicator, the `value` prop can be used. This prop is available for both `ProgressLinear` and `ProgressRadial`. The value must be inclusively between `0` and `100`, representing what percentage of the task has completed.

Author: I have made the change.
